MCP/0035 Multilingual support of Modelica (#2956)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/packages.tex

\filename{modelica://Modelica/Mechanics/C.jpg} is illegal.
The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
To support users who are not so familiar with this, a Modelica tool can support the translation of these texts into any language.
This should be done using external files, so that no modification of the actual Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}

> \item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!

Reviewer: What is `Text.string`? (I can only see `Text.testString` in the specification.)

Reviewer 2: That's a Text-annotation on a _connection_, since that has a parameter named string.

Reviewer: OK, thanks! Resolving.

\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{language}$} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{en}.
\end{enumerate}

The detailed format of these files is described in \href{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.pdf}{GNU gettext}.
For Modelica translations, only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used, meaning that a translation entry looks like this:
\begin{lstlisting}

> #: $\mathit{filename}$:$\mathit{lineNumber}$

Reviewer: To avoid incorrect treatment in translation tools, we should make sure we don't get C interpretation:
```suggestion
#: $\mathit{filename}$:$\mathit{lineNumber}$
# no-c-format
```

msgctxt $\mathit{messageContext}$
msgid $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$
msgstr $\mathit{messageTranslation}$

> \end{lstlisting}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\end{lstlisting}

The use of \lstinline!no-c-format! ensures that translation tools will not parse \lstinline!"%class"! as the format specifier \lstinline!%c! followed by \emph{lass}.
```

"POT-Creation-Date: 2019-03-15 10:52+0100\n"
"PO-Revision-Date: YEAR-MO-DA HO:MI+ZONE\n"
"Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
"Language-Team: LANGUAGE <LL@li.org>\n"
"Language: \n"
"MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
"Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8\n"
"Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
\end{lstlisting}
All general terms in the header should be replaced by specific information.

Following the header, there is one translation entry for each string to be translated.
It can start with an optional comment describing the location (file name and line number) of the text to translate.
Multiple occurences of the same string can be listed here, separated by space.
\end{nonnormative}

The $\mathit{messageContext}$ following the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! shall be the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!"Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin"!) where the text appears.
Short class definitions do not appear here.
Texts in such classes belong to the enclosing full class definition.

The text string which shall be translated is used as $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ (following the \lstinline!msgid! keyword), and shall contain the original string from the Modelica code.

> % Describe down-quoting and concatenation of Modelica string literals.

Reviewer 2: This is not clear, and I'm not sure _down_-quoting helps.

> The text string which shall be translated is used as $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ (following the \lstinline!msgid! keyword), and shall contain the original string from the Modelica code.
> % Describe down-quoting and concatenation of Modelica string literals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The text string which shall be translated is used as $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ (following the \lstinline!msgid! keyword), and is formed by first evaluating any operator \lstinline!+! to concatenate adjacent literals.
The result string literal in Modelica, is then quoted appropriately for gettext.
```
It is important that we concatenate first, and then translate.
I would prefer to avoid using up and down-quote as their meaning isn't clear.

Reviewer: I like the first part, but don't think this is the right place to talk about how strings are expressed in the PO-files:
```suggestion
The text string which shall be translated is used as $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ (following the \lstinline!msgid! keyword), and is formed by first evaluating any operator \lstinline!+! to concatenate adjacent literals.
```

> % Describe down-quoting and concatenation of Modelica string literals.

Reviewer 2: Basically down- and up-quoting do not seem to be standard terminology, and we should be clear about the order when combining concatenation with quoting.

> % Describe down-quoting and concatenation of Modelica string literals.

Reviewer: I agree that it would be nice if we could avoid talking about down- and up-quoting, and to me this comes so natural that it shouldn't need explanation. It's just that I have learned both from our discussions and elsewhere that this topic is a common source of confusion…

I don't see how the order would be unclear.

> % Describe down-quoting and concatenation of Modelica string literals.

Reviewer: Discussion to be continued under the [new suggestion by @HansOlsson](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/2956#discussion_r871111571). Resolving.

Note that if a \lstinline!msgid! string is given more than once in the same context, all occurrences are translated with the same (last) translation!

> 

Reviewer: Maybe an example is needed to clarify:
```suggestion

\begin{example}
Suppose the following expression appears in a context to be translated:
\begin{lstlisting}
  "Frequency: " + String(2 * Modelica.Constants.pi / T) + "rad/s\n"
+ "Period: %{T}"
\end{lstlisting}
The two strings to be used as $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ are \lstinline!"Frequency: "! and \lstinline!"rad/s\nPeriod: %{T}"!.
\end{example}

```

Author: Didn't we say that we only want to concatenate description strings? In such strings there are only string literals and no references to other variables.

Reviewer: I'm afraid that was a misunderstanding.  It is true that the situation is particularly clear for _description-string_ (which is `[ STRING { "+" STRING } ]` in the grammar), but the possibility to break long string literals apart is present and frequently used also elsewhere in Modelica source code.

To be it seems beyond the power of this MCP to mandate that the use habit of breaking up long literals is abandoned in order to get sensible text units to translate.

Maybe the example would be even better if there was also a `String` constant (for example `ModelicaServices.target`) being concatenated, to clarify that `String` constants shall not be treated similar to literals when it comes to translation?

Author: It was never the goal of this MCP to support the translation of strings in general expressions. because this would change probably the simulation result, or even lead to errors during simulation, if the strings are used to control something.
To enable translation of strings in expressions the modeler has to mark them as subject for translation, and then a tool can take care of it. But this would be another MCP.
The translation of descriptive strings as a first step is a significant improval for users which are not so familiar with the english language, and the missing translation of strings in expression should not hinder the completion of this MCP.

Reviewer: Yes applying translations anywhere in a model does indeed seem dangerous, but fortunately the MCP clearly defines the context where strings are to be translated, so there should be no risk of altering any simulation results.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Gerd here. It should only be description-strings (that must be literal or concatenated literals) and info-strings - and we should also restrict the latter to literal or concatenated literals.

Reviewer: But wouldn't that require that this MCP fully restricts `Documentation.info` and `Documentation.revisions` according to the same grammar as a description string? The idea isn't totally strange to me, but I still want to make sure this is really the direction we want to take this.

Why would one stop at `Documentation.info` and `Documentation.revisions`? Can you give a single example of one of the listed annotations that it would not make sense to restrict in the same way?

Reviewer 2: 2: Yes, it should apply to all of them.
1: For this MCP it suffices that only fully literal literal strings are supported for translation.

Reviewer: I don't agree that just single string literals is good enough for this MCP. A solution that only allows translation of the annotations that happen to be given without the use of literal concatenation just wouldn't meet my expectations of a ready MCP.

Note that I don't consider it an alternative to say that annotations given by concatenated literals should be translated piece by piece; this would just result in a mess for translators.

Reviewer 2: I meant string literals and concatenated string literals; so as soon as there is a non-literal string the entire text is ignored.

Reviewer: While that approach is safe in some sense, it seems we're only half done if we define a mechanism for translation without making sure that it is applicable to real-world libraries out there.  I see a chance to really strengthen this MCP by making sure that the things we would like to cover with translation really are available to translation.

To support this discussion, I think we should ask someone like @qlambert-pro to make a prototype for POT file creation that will tell us about any annotations that we say we'd like to translate, but that don't meet the concatenated string literal requirement.

Reviewer 3: You mean another prototype beside the SimulationX specific one from https://github.com/ESI-ITI-GmbH/TranslationTest/blob/master/Scripts/SimulationX/Generate-Template.py ?

Reviewer: By the way @beutlich, it's nice to see you here in the discussions of this PR!

Reviewer 2: I agree that an example would be helpful, but then an example without those problems.

The $\mathit{messageTranslation}$ (following the keyword \lstinline!msgstr!) is the translation of $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ and is typically edited using special tools for translators.
In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ may be used instead.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines.
E.g., the Modelica description
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B\"C" + "D\nE"
\end{lstlisting}
evaluates to:\par
\hspace{1em}\begin{minipage}{0.5\textwidth}
A\\
B"CD\\
E
\end{minipage}\par
which in the translation entry looks like:
\begin{lstlisting}
msgid: ""
"A\n"
"B\"CD\n"
"E"
\end{lstlisting}

> \end{nonnormative}

Reviewer: How about ending with an example?
```suggestion
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{example}
An entry for translating the description of \lstinline!Modelica.Math.sin! into Swedish could look like this:
\begin{listing}
#: Modelica/Math/package.mo:10126
# no-c-format
msgctx: "Modelica.Math.sin"
msgid: "Sine"
msgtxt: "Sinus"
\end{listing}
\end{example}
```

Reviewer 2: Makes sense.

\filename{modelica://Modelica/Mechanics/C.jpg} is illegal.
The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.

> To support users who are not so familiar with this, a Modelica tool can support the translation of these texts into any language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section describes how a tool can present the library in another language by providing extra information with the library, but without changing the library.
```
I believe this captures the idea.

Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

C-style and line comments are not translated.

The files to support translation must be provided along with the library.
They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/}.

> Two kind of files have to be provided:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two kind of files in \textcite{GettextManual} format have to be provided:
```

\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.

> It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It contains all necessary information to translate the texts in the library, but no translations.
```
Spell-checker didn't like "translateable" - and it is kind of redundant.

However, I deliberately changed to "the texts" - instead of "all texts"; one reason is that if a library wants to translate only some strings that should still work - another is that there are some texts (like comments) that we don't support translation for.

Reviewer: … but it turns out that you actually speak of _strings_ when explaining what you did:
```suggestion
It contains all necessary information to translate strings in the library, but no translations.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit unsure if it should be "the strings" or "strings".

Reviewer: I also thought of _the strings_, but to me it sounded indistinguishable from _all strings_.

Reviewer: As suggested in the meeting:
```suggestion
It describes all translatable strings in the library, but does not contain any translations.
```

\filename{modelica://Modelica/Mechanics/C.jpg} is illegal.
The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.

> To support users who are not so familiar with this, a Modelica tool can support the translation of these texts into any language.

Reviewer 3: This sounds too colloquial to me.

Additionally, a Modelica tool should not only support the translation (in the sense of translation process), but a Modelica IDE should display the localized/translated Modelica package.

Reviewer 2: I hope the new formulation is good enough.

> This should be done using external files, so that no modification of the actual Modelica text is required.

Reviewer 3: This sounds too colloquial to me.

```suggestion
Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
```

\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

C-style and line comments are not translated.

> The files to support translation must be provided by the developer of the library.

Reviewer 3: Is this really true?

I'd better go with

```suggestion
The files to support translation must be provided along with the library.
```

They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/}.

> Two kind of files have to be provided:

Reviewer 3: I guess, we should refer to getext here before listing the gettext specific file types.

\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.

> It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.

Reviewer 3: Not only descriptions, but all translatable text (as mentioned above).

The pattern \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.

> The pattern \filename{$\mathit{language}$} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{en}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{language}$} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{sv}.
```

English usually is not a target language.

Reviewer 2: (True, English as a target language is mainly useful for plural-handling and if you want to improve the translation quality even further - which seems beyond us at the moment.)

\end{enumerate}

> The detailed format of these files is described in \textcite{GettextManual}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The detailed format of these files is described in \textcite{GettextManual}.
Note that a tool may additionally provide translation files in other formats (including the binary variant), provided the ones above are available.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to optionally allow other formats - without going into more detail.

Reviewer 2: Updated!

For Modelica translations, only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used, meaning that a translation entry looks like this:
\begin{lstlisting}
#: $\mathit{filename}$:$\mathit{lineNumber}$

> # no-c-format

Reviewer: Fix mistake in PO-file syntax:
```suggestion
#, no-c-format
```

Reviewer 2: I assume that is correct, but can you provide a reference?

Reviewer: https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html#PO-Files

See code block following _One PO file entry has the following schematic structure:_.

Spaces outside strings are ignored and used as separators.

The files consist of a header and a body.
The header is marked with an empty \lstinline!msgid! and looks like this:
\begin{lstlisting}
# SOME DESCRIPTIVE TITLE.
# Copyright (C) YEAR THE PACKAGE'S COPYRIGHT HOLDER
# This file is distributed under the same license as the PACKAGE package.
# FIRST AUTHOR <EMAIL@ADDRESS>, YEAR.
#
#, fuzzy
msgid ""
msgstr ""
"Project-Id-Version: PACKAGE VERSION\n"
"Report-Msgid-Bugs-To: \n"
"POT-Creation-Date: 2019-03-15 10:52+0100\n"
"PO-Revision-Date: YEAR-MO-DA HO:MI+ZONE\n"
"Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
"Language-Team: LANGUAGE <LL@li.org>\n"
"Language: \n"
"MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
"Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8\n"
"Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
\end{lstlisting}
All general terms in the header should be replaced by specific information.

Following the header, there is one translation entry for each string to be translated.
It can start with an optional comment describing the location (file name and line number) of the text to translate.
Multiple occurences of the same string can be listed here, separated by space.
\end{nonnormative}

> The $\mathit{messageContext}$ following the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! shall be the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!"Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin"!) where the text appears.

Reviewer 4: It's not clear to me if the context is optional or not. It could potentially be useful to omit the context if a string is used multiple times in different contexts, but that's perhaps not a very common use case.

Reviewer 3: The original idea was to have it optional, and I guess that is also the case in the prototype implementation of SimulationX. @ooer Can you confirm?

Reviewer: Isn't this the kind of question where we should try to stick to common gettext practices?

Author: Having the messageContext always present and defined as identifier of the surrounding class would ease the tool implementation of some library operations like e.g. renaming/moving of classes and sub packages with recognition of the translation. Conversion scripts (class part) can also applied to the translated files then.

Reviewer 2: Yes, mandatory class context was the conclusion.

In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ may be used instead.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines.
E.g., the Modelica description
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B\"C" + "D\nE"
\end{lstlisting}
evaluates to:\par
\hspace{1em}\begin{minipage}{0.5\textwidth}
A\\
B"CD\\
E
\end{minipage}\par
which in the translation entry looks like:
\begin{lstlisting}
msgid: ""
"A\n"
"B\"CD\n"
"E"
\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
To support the translation of these strings a number of free and commercial tools exist in context of GNU gettext.

> A Modelica tool should provide a function to create the initial template file from an existing Modelica library.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Modelica tool should support the creation of the initial template file for a loaded Modelica library.
```

> A Modelica tool should provide a function to create the initial template file from an existing Modelica library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Just remove this, as it doesn't seem important to specify. Clearly it is a good idea, but it can also be done externally (so "loaded" doesn't make sense) - or perhaps implemented in some other way.

It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{language}$} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{sv}.
\end{enumerate}

The detailed format of these files is described in \textcite{GettextManual}.
For Modelica translations, only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used, meaning that a translation entry looks like this:
\begin{lstlisting}
#: $\mathit{filename}$:$\mathit{lineNumber}$
#, no-c-format
msgctxt $\mathit{messageContext}$
msgid $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$
msgstr $\mathit{messageTranslation}$

> \end{lstlisting}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\end{lstlisting}
The restriction to a few keywords makes it more straightforward for tools to support the format without relying on the implementation from \textcite{GettextManual}.
```

\filename{modelica://Modelica/Mechanics/C.jpg} is illegal.
The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
This section describes how a tool can present the library in another language.
Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

> The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:

Reviewer: Before we can work out the example starting with _Suppose the following expression appears in a context to be translated:_ (proposed in a comment), we need to normatively define the translatability of something which isn't a concatenation of string literals:
```
  annotation(…, Text(string = "Hello, " + getInstanceName()), …);
```
Is the string `"Hello, "` translatable in this case?

Reviewer 2: I added a text below related to that, but I don't see that as blocking.

Reviewer: Resolving now that we have another conversation on this topic.

\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

> C-style and line comments are not translated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
C-style and line comments are not translated.
Only literal strings and concatenations of literals strings are translated.
In order to have parameter values as part of the texts the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}) and translations should preserve those substrings.
```

Reviewer: I just realized we have established a terminology for the comments:
```suggestion
Comments (delimited as well as rest-of-line) are not translated.
Only literal strings and concatenations of literals strings are translated.
In order to have parameter values as part of the texts the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}) and translations should preserve those substrings.
```

Reviewer: The proposed formulation isn't clear enough; we need a precise definition of what is expected to go into the template files.
```suggestion
Comments (delimited as well as rest-of-line) are not translated.
Where translation applies, the strings to be translated are the maximum subexpressions consisting of one or more concatenated string string literals.

\begin{example}
In the following annotation, the strings to be translated are \emph{Hello, AAA} and \emph{BBB}:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
annotation(…, Text(string = "Hello, " + "AAA" + getInstanceName() + "BBB"), …);
\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}

\begin{nonnormative}
In order to have parameter values as part of the texts, the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}) and translations should preserve those substrings.
\end{nonnormative}
```

Author: So, if I understnd it rigtht. in the example the substrings are translated separately. I would agree with such solution.

Reviewer: Yes, that's correct.  (The alternative design would have been to say that there is nothing in this `Text.string` that can be translated, since only constructs _entirely_ given by one or more concatenated strings would be subject to translation.)

Reviewer 2: The alternative design was the intended one, as this would otherwise attempt to translate _parts of a sentence_ separately which is simply not good, which was the reason to link to `%par` (and `%name`) which are better ways of handling this. I also strongly believe that examples of translation shall have actual English texts and not faked ones - as that will make such issues more obvious.

Reviewer: OK, I'll alter the example:
```suggestion
Comments (delimited as well as rest-of-line) are not translated.
Where translation applies, the strings to be translated are the maximum subexpressions consisting of one or more concatenated string string literals.

\begin{example}
Let \lstinline!stateSelectName! be a helper function that selects a string based on a \lstinline!StateSelect! value:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
function stateSelectName
  input StateSelect stateSelect;
  input String[5] names "Name of StateSelect enumerators, in the order never, avoid, default, prefer, always";
  output String name;
  $\ldots$
end stateSelectName;
\end{lstlisting}
Consider the following \lstinline!Text.string! (which is a construct where translation applies) used to show the state selection setting in an icon:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
annotation(…, Text(string =
    "State " +
    "selection: " +
    stateSelectName(stateSelect, {"never", "avoid", "default", "prefer", "always"}),
 …);
\end{lstlisting}
The strings to be translated are:
\begin{itemize}
\item ``State selection: ''
\item ``never''
\item ``avoid''
\item ``default''
\item ``prefer''
\item ``always''
\end{itemize}
\end{example}

\begin{nonnormative}
In order to have parameter values as part of the texts, the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}) and translations should preserve those substrings.
\end{nonnormative}
```

As the use of format strings is a very good idea for shaping meaningful strings for translation, I also see a clear need to support constructs like this:
```
text = someKindOfSprintf("Start (%1): %startParam", (if startFixed then "fixed" else "non-fixed")))
```
That is, the main string to be translated appears as an argument to some string formatting function.  (The formatting function could be both a constant-evaluable user-defined function, or something provided by the language in the future.)

Reviewer 2: To me this example is too long and tangential compared to the topic, and maximum subexpressions doesn't seem to correspond to the decision. 

Additionally I believe that at least the preservation of `%p` should be normative - and even if the rest of the sentence could be non-normative we would then sort of have a normative text depending on the non-normative part which seems odd.

Reviewer: > To me this example is too long and tangential compared to the topic, and maximum subexpressions doesn't seem to correspond to the decision.

I'm not sure which decision you refer to, but I agree that the example is too long.  It just ended up longer because the originally suggested example was considered a fake.  I'll start over by suggesting a shorter example again.

The files to support translation must be provided along with the library.
They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/}.

Two kind of files in \textcite{GettextManual} format have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}

> \item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot} (Portable Object Template), as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.
```

It describes all translatable strings in the library, but does not contain any translations.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.

> \item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po} (Portable Object), as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.
```

In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ may be used instead.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines.
E.g., the Modelica description
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B\"C" + "D\nE"
\end{lstlisting}
evaluates to:\par
\hspace{1em}\begin{minipage}{0.5\textwidth}
A\\
B"CD\\
E
\end{minipage}\par
which in the translation entry looks like:
\begin{lstlisting}
msgid: ""
"A\n"
"B\"CD\n"
"E"
\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{example}
An entry for translating the description of \lstinline!Modelica.Math.sin! into Swedish could look like this:

> \begin{listing}
> #: Modelica/Math/package.mo:10126
> #, no-c-format
> msgctx: "Modelica.Math.sin"
> msgid: "Sine"
> msgtxt: "Sinus"
> \end{listing}
> \end{example}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\begin{lstlisting}
#: Modelica/Math/package.mo:10126
#, no-c-format
msgctx: "Modelica.Math.sin"
msgid: "Sine"
msgtxt: "Sinus"
\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}
```
Incorrect LaTeX-syntax.

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
This section describes how a tool can present the library in another language.
Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

Comments (delimited as well as rest-of-line) are not translated.

> Only literal strings and concatenations of literals strings are translated.

Reviewer: Once more trying to get clarification about exactly what is supposed to be translated.
```suggestion
Where translation applies, the strings to be translated are the maximum subexpressions consisting of one or more concatenated string literals.

\begin{example}
Consider the following \lstinline!Text.string! (which is a construct where translation applies):
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
annotation(…, Text(string = "Hello, " +
    "the " + getInstanceName() +
    " is an instance of %class."), …);
\end{lstlisting}
The two strings to be translated are:
\begin{itemize}
\item \emph{Hello, the\ }
\item \emph{\ is an instance of \%class.}
\end{itemize}
\end{example}

```

Again, one of my main reasons for being able to translate sub-expressions is that it is common to have `sprintf`-like functions, where the string to be translated is one of the arguments in a function call.  Modelica doesn't have this kind of function today, but it could be provided by a library, or be added to the standard in the future.

If we still don't want sub-expression to be translatable, we should instead illustrate this with a similar example.

Reviewer 2: In this case `"%name"` is preferable over `getInstanceName()`. Yes, I'm aware that it will be shorter - but to me that is a benefit.

Reviewer: Sure, in many cases one would probably use `%name` instead, but it doesn't work for the purpose of this example.  The point of the example is about the general principle of finding the concatenated string literals, and I am trying to avoid the use of some imaginary under-defined `sprintf` function.

Would it be better if `getInstanceName()` was stored in a constant?
```
constant String myName = "instance named " + getInstanceName();
annotation(…, Text(string = "Hello, " +
    "the " + myName +
    " is an instance of %class."), …);

```

> In order to have parameter values as part of the texts the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}) and translations should preserve those substrings.

Reviewer: I guess it should be up to the translators to decide:
```suggestion
In order to have parameter values as part of the texts the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}), and translators need to be aware of these substrings in order to make good translations.
```

In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ may be used instead.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines.
E.g., the Modelica description
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B\"C" + "D\nE"
\end{lstlisting}
evaluates to:\par
\hspace{1em}\begin{minipage}{0.5\textwidth}
A\\
B"CD\\
E
\end{minipage}\par
which in the translation entry looks like:
\begin{lstlisting}
msgid: ""
"A\n"
"B\"CD\n"
"E"
\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{example}

> An entry for translating the description of \lstinline!Modelica.Math.sin! into Swedish could look like this:
> \begin{lstlisting}
> #: Modelica/Math/package.mo:10126
> #, no-c-format
> msgctx: "Modelica.Math.sin"
> msgid: "Sine"
> msgtxt: "Sinus"
> \end{lstlisting}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider a simple sine-source:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
within MyPackage.Sources;
model Sine "Sine"
  parameter Frequency f=2 "Frequency";
  RealOutput y=sin(2*pi*f); // Relying on imported types
  /* Could add details. Note that this is not translated */
  annotation(Icon(graphics={Text(extent={{0,0},{40,40}},
                        textString="Frequency: %f")}));
end Sine;
\end{lstlisting}
The entries for translating this model into Swedish could look like this:
\begin{lstlisting}
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10126
#, no-c-format
msgctx: "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid: "Sine"
msgtxt: "Sinus"
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10127
#, no-c-format
msgctx: "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid: "Frequency"
msgtxt: "Frekvens"
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10129
#, no-c-format
msgctx: "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid: "Frequency: %f"
msgtxt: "Frekvens %f"
\end{lstlisting}
```
I believe having a more complete example helps.
I'm not sure if the comments are needed or not, but I think they illustrate the concept.

Reviewer: Time to add missing punctuation and apply change?

\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
This section describes how a tool can present the library in another language.
Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\end{itemize}

> \end{itemize}

Reviewer: For instance:
```suggestion
\end{itemize}

\begin{nonnormative}
Note that none of the constructs that can be translated can have any impact on simulation results.
\end{nonnormative}
```

Comments (delimited as well as rest-of-line) are not translated.

> Only literal strings and concatenations of literals strings are translated.

Reviewer: According to today's language group poll (and get rid of typo):
```suggestion
Only constructs given entirely by one or more concatenated string literals are translated.
```

In order to have parameter values as part of the texts the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}), and translators need to be aware of these substrings in order to make good translations.

\begin{example}
Consider:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
annotation(…, Text(string = "1st Frequency is %f1."), 

>                 Text(string = "2nd Frequency "+"is "+String(f2)+".")…);

Reviewer: I guess this is what breaks the CI:
```suggestion
                Text(string = "2nd Frequency "+"is "+String(f2)+"."), $\ldots$);
```

\end{lstlisting}

> In this example only the string \lstinline!"1st Frequency is %f1."! can be translated, and no strings from the second line.

Reviewer: I like the clarity of the example, but not what it states. :)

To me the ability to support use of `sprintf`-like functions is a strong reason to allow sub-expressions such as `"2nd Frequency " = "is"` to be translated.  Good question for today's language group phone meeting!

Reviewer: The GitHub suggestion doesn't cover all the lines to which the conversation applies, so I'll resolve and restart.

> annotation(…, Text(string = "1st Frequency is %f1."), 
>                 Text(string = "2nd Frequency "+"is "+String(f2)+"."), $\ldots$);
> \end{lstlisting}
> In this example only the string \lstinline!"1st Frequency is %f1."! can be translated, and no strings from the second line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To go with the language group poll in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/2956#issuecomment-1274727138, let's make simplify the example for maximum clarity (including avoiding unnecessary string concatenation, as this is not the point of the example):
```suggestion
annotation($\ldots$, Text(string = "1st Frequency: %f1"), 
                Text(string = "2nd Frequency: " + String(w2 / (2 * pi)), $\ldots$);
```
\end{lstlisting}
In this example only \lstinline!"1st Frequency is %f1."! can be translated; the second \lstinline!Text.string! doesn't consist entirely of concatenated string literals, and is hence completely excluded from translation.
```

The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
This section describes how a tool can present the library in another language.
Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!

> \item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!

Reviewer: As suggested by @adeas31:
```suggestion
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Figure.caption!, \lstinline!Figure.group!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Axis.label!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\item \lstinline!mustBeConnected!
```
```suggestion
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
```
```suggestion
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
```

\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\begin{nonnormative}
None of the translatable constructs can have any impact on simulation results.
\end{nonnormative}

Comments (delimited as well as rest-of-line) are not translated.
Only constructs given entirely by one or more concatenated string literals are translated, using nothing but the operator \lstinline!+! for concatenation.
In order to have parameter values as part of the texts the special substitution syntax is preferable (see \cref{text} and \cref{variable-replacements}), and translators need to be aware of these substrings in order to make good translations.

\begin{example}
Consider:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> annotation($\ldots$, Text(string = "1st Frequency: %f1"), 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
annotation($\ldots$, Text(string = "1st Frequency: %f1"),
```
Fix white-space

>                 Text(string = "2nd Frequency: " + String(w2 / (2 * pi)), $\ldots$);

Reviewer: Unbalanced parentheses:
```suggestion
               Text(string = "2nd Frequency: " + String(w2 / (2 * pi))), $\ldots$);
```

But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines.
E.g., the Modelica description
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B\"C" + "D\nE"
\end{lstlisting}
evaluates to:\par
\hspace{1em}\begin{minipage}{0.5\textwidth}
A\\
B"CD\\
E
\end{minipage}\par
which in the translation entry looks like:
\begin{lstlisting}
msgid: ""
"A\n"
"B\"CD\n"
"E"
\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{example}
Consider a simple sine-source:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
within MyPackage.Sources;
model Sine "Sine"
  parameter Frequency f=2 "Frequency";
  RealOutput y=sin(2*pi*f); // Relying on imported types
  /* Could add details. Note that this is not translated */
  annotation(Icon(graphics={Text(extent={{0,0},{40,40}},
                        textString="Frequency: %f")}));
end Sine;
\end{lstlisting}
The entries for translating this model into Swedish could look like this:
\begin{lstlisting}

> #: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10126
> #, no-c-format
> msgctx: "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
> msgid: "Sine"
> msgtxt: "Sinus"
> #: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10127
> #, no-c-format
> msgctx: "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
> msgid: "Frequency"
> msgtxt: "Frekvens"
> #: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10129
> #, no-c-format
> msgctx: "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
> msgid: "Frequency: %f"
> msgtxt: "Frekvens: %f"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10126
#, no-c-format
msgctxt "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid "Sine"
msgstr "Sinus"
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10127
#, no-c-format
msgctxt "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid "Frequency"
msgstr "Frekvens"
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10129
#, no-c-format
msgctxt "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid "Frequency: %f"
msgstr "Frekvens: %f"
```
After actually trying it.

Reviewer: Well done!

\end{lstlisting}
\end{example}

> 

Reviewer 5: Can't we categorized all strings under one context? So we don't have to repeat the context again.

Reviewer: That should follow by the gettext specification.  The way I read it, the `msgctxt` belongs to a single `msgid`.

Reviewer 2: Yes. It wasn't 100% clear at first to me, but it says:
> Note that an empty context string and an absent msgctxt line do not mean the same thing.
An absent context only makes sense if it is for each message.

\filename{modelica://Modelica/Mechanics/C.jpg} is illegal.
The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
This section describes how a tool can present the library in another language.
Translated Modelica text is provided by external files, so that no modification of the original Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!

> \item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!

Reviewer 3: Line breaks do not look that good. Maybe have two sperate items for loadSelector and saveselector.

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14896695/204051155-bef3732f-19fa-47cf-a149-b028e75b86b7.png)

Reviewer: To avoid separating the closely related constructs into separate items we can introduce a PDF-only line-break:
```suggestion
\item
  \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!,
  \ifpdf\\\else\fi% Avoid comma ending up at beginning of wrapped line in PDF output.
  \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
```

In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ may be used instead.
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{nonnormative}
Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines.
E.g., the Modelica description
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B\"C" + "D\nE"
\end{lstlisting}
evaluates to:\par
\hspace{1em}\begin{minipage}{0.5\textwidth}
A\\
B"CD\\
E
\end{minipage}\par
which in the translation entry looks like:
\begin{lstlisting}
msgid ""
"A\n"
"B\"CD\n"
"E"
\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\begin{example}
Consider a simple sine-source:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
within MyPackage.Sources;
model Sine "Sine"
  parameter Frequency f=2 "Frequency";

>   RealOutput y=sin(2*pi*f); // Relying on imported types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  RealOutput y=sin(2*pi*f*time); // Relying on imported types
```

Reviewer: Good suggestion.

When looking at this line, I must say that I find the comment confusing.  I believe it is there to just show that it doesn't get a translation, but it looks as if it is trying to explain something about imported types in relation to translations.  Wouldn't it be better to just drop the comment, and rely on the delimited comment below for illustrating that a comment doesn't get a translation?
```suggestion
  RealOutput y=sin(2*pi*f*time);
```

  /* Could add details. Note that this is not translated */
  annotation(Icon(graphics={Text(extent={{0,0},{40,40}},
                        textString="Frequency: %f")}));
end Sine;
\end{lstlisting}
The entries for translating this model into Swedish could look like this:
\begin{lstlisting}
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10126
#, no-c-format
msgctxt "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid "Sine"
msgstr "Sinus"
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10127
#, no-c-format
msgctxt "MyPackage.Sources.Sine"
msgid "Frequency"
msgstr "Frekvens"

> #: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10129

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#: MyPackage/Sources/package.mo:10131
```

This should be done using external files, so that no modification of the actual Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The files to support translation must be provided by the developer of the library.
They must be stored in a subdirectory of the \filename{Resources} directory of the library with the name \filename{Language}.

Two kind of files have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}
\item template file \filename{<LibraryName>.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{<LibraryName>} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item one file for each supported language with the name \filename{<LibraryName>.<language>.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g. de or en.
\end{enumerate}

The files consist of a header and a body.
All text strings are in double quotes and encoded with UTF-8 characters.
Comments start with an \lstinline!#! and are continued until the end of line.
Spaces outside strings are ignored and used as separators.

> The detailed format of these files is described in \href{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.pdf}{GNU gettext}.

Reviewer: Isn't it dangerous to repeat the specification of the file format, rather than relying on the external gettext specification?  Maybe it would be better to just have a non-normative section with some examples of how the format could be used?

Author: Yes, maybe its better to have it as non-normative text.

Reviewer 2: I added that in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3131

Reviewer: I see that it at least made some parts non-normative.  Resolving and making another comment below.

\filename{modelica://Modelica/Mechanics/C.jpg} is illegal.
The references \filename{modelica://Modelica.Mechanics/C.jpg} and \filename{modelica://Modelica/C.jpg} must also refer to two distinct resources.
\end{example}

\section{Multilingual Descriptions}\label{multilingual-descriptions}

\begin{nonnormative}
Descriptive texts in a model or library are usually formulated in English.
To support users who are not so familiar with this, a Modelica tool can support the translation of these texts into any language.
This should be done using external files, so that no modification of the actual Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The files to support translation must be provided by the developer of the library.

> They must be stored in a subdirectory of the \filename{Resources} directory of the library with the name \filename{Language}.

Reviewer 2: I added that in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3131

> They must be stored in a subdirectory of the \filename{Resources} directory of the library with the name \filename{Language}.

Reviewer: OK.  Resolving.

Two kind of files have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}
\item template file \filename{<LibraryName>.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{<LibraryName>} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item one file for each supported language with the name \filename{<LibraryName>.<language>.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.

> The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g. de or en.

Reviewer: Formatting:
```suggestion
The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g. \filename{de} or \filename{en}.
```

# Copyright (C) YEAR THE PACKAGE'S COPYRIGHT HOLDER
# This file is distributed under the same license as the PACKAGE package.
# FIRST AUTHOR <EMAIL@ADDRESS>, YEAR.
#
#, fuzzy
msgid ""
msgstr ""
"Project-Id-Version: PACKAGE VERSION\n"
"Report-Msgid-Bugs-To: \n"
"POT-Creation-Date: 2019-03-15 10:52+0100\n"
"PO-Revision-Date: YEAR-MO-DA HO:MI+ZONE\n"
"Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
"Language-Team: LANGUAGE <LL@li.org>\n"
"Language: \n"
"MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
"Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8\n"
"Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
\end{lstlisting}
All general terms in the header should be replaced by specific information.

In the body, directly following the header, for each descriptive text there is an entry of the form
\begin{lstlisting}
#: <file name>:<line number>
msgctxt "<context identifier>"
msgid "<descriptive text>"
msgstr "<translation>"
\end{lstlisting}
Only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used.

At first there can be an optional comment describing the location (file name and line number) of the text to translate. Multiple occurences of the same string can be listed here, separated by space.

> Then, the \lstinline!<context identifier>! behind the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! is the full name of the Modelica class (e.g. \lstinline!Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin!) where the text appears in.

Reviewer: Note that this is technically an abuse of the Modelica language of `\lstinline`.  I suppose it wouldn't hurt to define a simple \emph{gettext} language?

Reviewer 2: Possibly, but I don't see that it is necessary and gives us much.

> Then, the \lstinline!<context identifier>! behind the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! is the full name of the Modelica class (e.g. \lstinline!Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin!) where the text appears in.

Reviewer: Also need to guard the period:
```suggestion
Then, the \lstinline!<context identifier>! behind the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! is the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin!) where the text appears in.
```

Short class definitions do not appear here.
Texts in such classes belong to the enclosing full class definition.

> After the `msgid` keyword the text string which shall be translated follows.

Reviewer: Use proper markup (not Markdown).  (Not sure whether that should be `\lstinline[language=gettext]` or some just `\emph`.)

Reviewer: At least the Markdown is no longer there.  Resolving.

> It should contain the original string from the Modelica text representation.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what the difference is between those two options.

> It should contain the original string from the Modelica text representation.

Reviewer: This is now the topic of https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/2956/files#r826643880, so I'll resolve this conversation to keep all discussion in one place.

Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

\begin{nonnormative}
In order to avoid long lines, strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines, e.g.
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B"
\end{lstlisting}
is converted to
\begin{lstlisting}
"A\n"
"B"
\end{lstlisting}
These strings are concatenated when read.
Please regard that if a \lstinline!msgid! string is given more than once in the same context, all occurrences are translated with the same (last) translation!
\end{nonnormative}

The keyword \lstinline!msgstr! is followed by the translation of \lstinline!msgid!.

> With regard to control characters and line breaks, the same rules apply as for msgid.

Reviewer: Looks good now.  Resolving.

In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the contents of \lstinline!msgid! may be used instead.

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in following annotations:
\begin{itemize}

> \item Text.string, Text.textString
> \item missingInnerMessage, obsolete, unassignedMessage
> \item Dialog.[group|tab]
> \item Dialog.[load|save]Selector.[caption|filter]
> \item Documentation.[info|revisions]
> \item Figure.title, Plot.title, Curve.legend

Reviewer: Formatting (there might be more compact ways to write, but I'll not try to come up with something right now):
```suggestion
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
```

\begin{lstlisting}
# SOME DESCRIPTIVE TITLE.
# Copyright (C) YEAR THE PACKAGE'S COPYRIGHT HOLDER
# This file is distributed under the same license as the PACKAGE package.
# FIRST AUTHOR <EMAIL@ADDRESS>, YEAR.
#
#, fuzzy
msgid ""
msgstr ""
"Project-Id-Version: PACKAGE VERSION\n"
"Report-Msgid-Bugs-To: \n"
"POT-Creation-Date: 2019-03-15 10:52+0100\n"
"PO-Revision-Date: YEAR-MO-DA HO:MI+ZONE\n"
"Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
"Language-Team: LANGUAGE <LL@li.org>\n"
"Language: \n"
"MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
"Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8\n"
"Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
\end{lstlisting}
All general terms in the header should be replaced by specific information.

In the body, directly following the header, for each descriptive text there is an entry of the form
\begin{lstlisting}
#: <file name>:<line number>
msgctxt "<context identifier>"
msgid "<descriptive text>"
msgstr "<translation>"
\end{lstlisting}
Only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used.

At first there can be an optional comment describing the location (file name and line number) of the text to translate.

>  Multiple occurences of the same string can be listed here, separated by space.

Reviewer: This looks like more repetition of the gettext specification that should be non-normative when mentioned here.

Reviewer: Noting that this still hasn't been either commented or addressed.

Reviewer: Looks good now.  Resolving.

> Then, the \lstinline!<context identifier>! behind the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! is the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin!) where the text appears in.

Reviewer: This should be reformulated slightly to separate it from the non-normative repetition of the gettext specification:
```suggestion
The \lstinline!<context identifier>! following the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! shall be the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin!) where the text appears.
```

Short class definitions do not appear here.
Texts in such classes belong to the enclosing full class definition.

> After the `msgid` keyword the text string which shall be translated follows.

Author: ```suggestion
After the \lstinline!msgid! keyword the text string which shall be translated follows.
```

It should contain the original string from the Modelica text representation.
Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.

> Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

Reviewer: As I see it, and assuming the conversation above regarding format string syntax gets resolved, all of this also belongs to the non-normative repetition of the gettext specification.  Most of it could probably even be removed if we just extend the non-normative explanation below a little bit.  (See separate suggestion.)

\begin{nonnormative}

> In order to avoid long lines, strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines, e.g.

Reviewer: Make this non-normative explanation more independent on the parts above that might get removed:
```suggestion
In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines, e.g.
```

\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B"
\end{lstlisting}
is converted to
\begin{lstlisting}
"A\n"
"B"
\end{lstlisting}
These strings are concatenated when read.
Please regard that if a \lstinline!msgid! string is given more than once in the same context, all occurrences are translated with the same (last) translation!
\end{nonnormative}

The keyword \lstinline!msgstr! is followed by the translation of \lstinline!msgid!.

> With regard to control characters and line breaks, the same rules apply as for msgid.

Author: ```suggestion
With regard to control characters and line breaks, the same rules apply as for \lstinline!msgid!.
```

In the template file this string is empty by definition.

> If this is empty in a language specific file the contents of \lstinline!msgid! may be used instead.

Reviewer: More repetition of gettext specification to be marked non-normative or removed.

Author: This is now nonnormative.

Author: This is now nonnormative.

Reviewer: Yes.  Resolving.

To support users who are not so familiar with this, a Modelica tool can support the translation of these texts into any language.
This should be done using external files, so that no modification of the actual Modelica text is required.
\end{nonnormative}

The files to support translation must be provided by the developer of the library.
They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/}.

Two kind of files have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{<LibraryName>.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/<LibraryName>.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{<LibraryName>} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{<LibraryName>.<language>.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/<LibraryName>.<language>.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.

> The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g. \filename{de} or \filename{en}.

Reviewer: Missing guard for period not at end of sentence:
```suggestion
The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{en}.
```

Author: change was comtained in another commit.

Reviewer: Yes.  Resolving.

> They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/}.
> 
> Two kind of files have to be provided:
> \begin{enumerate}
> \item Template file \filename{<LibraryName>.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/<LibraryName>.pot}.
> It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
> The pattern \filename{<LibraryName>} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
> \item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{<LibraryName>.<language>.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/<LibraryName>.<language>.po}.
> This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
> The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g. \filename{de} or \filename{en}.

Reviewer: Some more angle brackets that can be replaced by `\mathit`:
```suggestion
They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/}.

Two kind of files have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{language}$} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{en}.
```

\end{enumerate}

The files consist of a header and a body.
The detailed format of these files is described in \href{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.pdf}{GNU gettext}.

\begin{nonnormative}
All text strings are in double quotes and encoded with UTF-8 characters.
Comments start with an \lstinline!#! and are continued until the end of line.
Spaces outside strings are ignored and used as separators.

> The header is marked with an empty \emph{msgid} entry and looks like this:

Reviewer: Wrong formatting of _msgid_:
```suggestion
The header is marked with an empty \lstinline!msgid! entry and looks like this:
```

\end{nonnormative}

The files to support translation must be provided by the developer of the library.
They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/}.

Two kind of files have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{<LibraryName>.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/<LibraryName>.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{<LibraryName>} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{<LibraryName>.<language>.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://<LibraryName>/Resources/Language/<LibraryName>.<language>.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
The pattern \filename{<language>} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g. \filename{de} or \filename{en}.
\end{enumerate}

The files consist of a header and a body.
The detailed format of these files is described in \href{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.pdf}{GNU gettext}.

> \begin{nonnormative}

Reviewer: Use empty line to clarify paragraph break before non-normative section:
```suggestion

\begin{nonnormative}
```

> All text strings are in double quotes and encoded with UTF-8 characters.

Reviewer: Add comment about unusual amount of non-normative content to follow:
```suggestion
In the remainder of this section, several facts about the gettext specification are described non-normatively for easy access to some of the gettext basics.
Always refer to the external gettext specification for full detail or in case of doubt.

All text strings are in double quotes and encoded with UTF-8 characters.
```

Author: Resolving

Reviewer: I don't understand the comment, what do you mean?

Author: Sorry, it was a mistake.

Reviewer: OK, no problem.

Comments start with an \lstinline!#! and are continued until the end of line.
Spaces outside strings are ignored and used as separators.

The header is marked with an empty \emph{msgid} entry and looks like this:
\begin{lstlisting}
# SOME DESCRIPTIVE TITLE.
# Copyright (C) YEAR THE PACKAGE'S COPYRIGHT HOLDER
# This file is distributed under the same license as the PACKAGE package.
# FIRST AUTHOR <EMAIL@ADDRESS>, YEAR.
#
#, fuzzy
msgid ""
msgstr ""
"Project-Id-Version: PACKAGE VERSION\n"
"Report-Msgid-Bugs-To: \n"
"POT-Creation-Date: 2019-03-15 10:52+0100\n"
"PO-Revision-Date: YEAR-MO-DA HO:MI+ZONE\n"
"Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
"Language-Team: LANGUAGE <LL@li.org>\n"
"Language: \n"
"MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
"Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8\n"
"Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
\end{lstlisting}
All general terms in the header should be replaced by specific information.

In the body, directly following the header, for each descriptive text there is an entry of the form
\begin{lstlisting}

> #: <file name>:<line number>

Reviewer: At least outside string literals, we use math variable style instead of angle brackets:
```suggestion
#: $\mathit{filename}$:$\mathit{lineNumber}$
```

Reviewer: Note that this also gets clarified by the new example suggested at the end of the section.

> msgctxt "<context identifier>"
> msgid "<descriptive text>"
> msgstr "<translation>"

Reviewer: Looking at the rest of the document, I think we should avoid the use of angle brackets also inside string literals.  I think that the string quotes belong where examples are given instead of here:
```suggestion
msgctxt $\mathit{messageContext}$
msgid $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$
msgstr $\mathit{messageTranslation}$
```

\end{lstlisting}

> \end{nonnormative}

Reviewer: Empty line after non-normative section to clarify paragraph break:
```suggestion
\end{nonnormative}

```

Only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used.

\begin{nonnormative}
At first there can be an optional comment describing the location (file name and line number) of the text to translate.
Multiple occurences of the same string can be listed here, separated by space.
\end{nonnormative}

> The \lstinline!<context identifier>! following the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! shall be the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin!) where the text appears.

Reviewer: To go with the change suggested above:
```suggestion
The $\mathit{messageContext}$ following the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! shall be the full name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!"Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin"!) where the text appears.
```

Reviewer: I guess we should also specify that the "full name" should not include a leading dot?
```suggestion
The $\mathit{messageContext}$ following the keyword \lstinline!msgctxt! shall be the fully qualified name of the Modelica class (e.g., \lstinline!"Modelica.Blocks.Math.Sin"! -- note absence of leading dot) where the text appears.
```

Short class definitions do not appear here.
Texts in such classes belong to the enclosing full class definition.

> \begin{nonnormative}
> After the \lstinline!msgid! keyword the text string which shall be translated follows.
> \end{nonnormative}
> It should contain the original string from the Modelica text representation.

Reviewer: I think these two sentences need to be combined into a single normative paragraph; otherwise the second sentence has a strange reference out of the normative text.
While this sentence just expresses a fact about gettext, I think that the following sentence depends upon this for context, and that both sentences therefore need to be in the same normative paragraph.
```suggestion
The text string which shall be translated (following the \lstinline!msgid! keyword) shall contain the original string from the Modelica code.
```

(I also noted that we don't use the terminology _Modelica text representation_.)

> \begin{nonnormative}

Reviewer: (This comment belongs to the paragraph above, but I need to attach it to this line to keep the conversations apart.)

I think we need to deal with the Modelica programming pattern where a long string is constructed by concatenating several literals.  For example:
```
          assert(bb >= 0, "\nNot possible to use band pass filter, since transformation results in\n"+
                          "system that does not have conjugate complex poles.\n" +
                          "Try to use another analog filter for the band pass.\n");
```

A rough search reveals 140 occurrences in the MSL.

To address the problem, I suggest that it is specified that Modelica code string literals and concatenation of literals shall be evaluated before being translated.

Author: Strings in expressions are not translated (see list below). I also want to avoid the evaluation, because then a full instantiation of the model might be needed, which is not always possible, e.g. partial models.

Reviewer: This is why the evaluation needs to be restricted to the minimal expression language consisting of just string literals and string concatenation.

Since in Modelica control sequences also start with a backslash and another backslash is used to use sequences literally or to hide double quotes, no change is required here.
But Modelica allows strings to go over more than one line, gettext does not.
Therefore, line breaks in Modelica must be encoded with \lstinline!"\n"! for gettext.

In order to avoid long lines in the translated strings (following \lstinline!msgid! or \lstinline!msgstr!), strings may be split into smaller parts given on consecutive lines, e.g.
\begin{lstlisting}
"A
B"
\end{lstlisting}
is converted to
\begin{lstlisting}
"A\n"
"B"
\end{lstlisting}
These strings are concatenated when read.

> Please regard that if a \lstinline!msgid! string is given more than once in the same context, all occurrences are translated with the same (last) translation!

Reviewer: We shouldn't introduce the use of _please_ in the document:
```suggestion
Note that if a \lstinline!msgid! string is given more than once in the same context, all occurrences are translated with the same (last) translation!
```

> The keyword \lstinline!msgstr! is followed by the translation of \lstinline!msgid!.

Reviewer: To go with suggested change above:
```suggestion
The $\mathit{messageTranslation}$ (following the keyword \lstinline!msgstr!) is the translation of $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$.
```

Reviewer: I'm afraid that it may also have been a mistake to resolve this without committing the suggestion (by similarity with the uncommitted suggestion above). Reopening just to make sure.

> With regard to control characters and line breaks, the same rules apply as for \lstinline!msgid!.
> In the template file this string is empty by definition.
> If this is empty in a language specific file the contents of \lstinline!msgid! may be used instead.

Reviewer: Possible change to go with suggested change above:
```suggestion
With regard to control characters and line breaks, the same rules apply as for $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$.
In the template file this string is empty by definition.
If this is empty in a language specific file the $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$ may be used instead.
```

\end{nonnormative}

The texts in following Modelica constructs should be translated:
\begin{itemize}
\item description strings of component declarations and classes
\item strings in the following annotations:
\begin{itemize}
\item \lstinline!Text.string!, \lstinline!Text.textString!
\item \lstinline!missingInnerMessage!, \lstinline!obsolete!, \lstinline!unassignedMessage!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.group!, \lstinline!Dialog.tab!
\item \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.loadSelector.filter!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.caption!, \lstinline!Dialog.saveSelector.filter!
\item \lstinline!Documentation.info!, \lstinline!Documentation.revisions!
\item \lstinline!Figure.title!, \lstinline!Plot.title!, \lstinline!Curve.legend!
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

> C-style and line comments are not translated.

Reviewer: The terminology we use is this:
```suggestion
Delimited comments and rest-of-line comments are not translated.
```

But why talk about the two kinds of comments rather than just comments in general?
```suggestion
Comments are not translated.
```

Author: This terminology was used to make it clear that comments are meant and not the description strings of declarations which also serve often as comments that are presented at the GUI of the tool.
But if you think it is sufficiently clear, we can reduce it to the latter.

Reviewer: My primary goal is to to avoid inconsistent use of terminology in the specification.  For maximum clarity, I'd therefore go with the former suggestion, but for brevity I could also see us going with the latter.

> 

Reviewer: How about ending with a complete example of a translation entry?
```suggestion

\begin{example}
An entry for translating the description of \lstinline!Modelica.Math.sin! could look like this:
\begin{listing}
#: "Modelica/Math/package.mo" : 10126
msgctx: "Modelica.Math.sin"
msgid: "Sine"
msgtxt: "Sinus"
\end{listing}
\end{example}

```

Reviewer: This comment is now marked as outdated. Resolving in order to restart it.

\end{nonnormative}

The files to support translation must be provided by the developer of the library.
They must be stored in the resources directory \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/}.

Two kind of files have to be provided:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Template file \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.pot}.
It contains all necessary information to translate all descriptions, but no translations.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$} denotes the toplevel class name of the library.
\item One file for each supported language with the name \filename{$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}, as the resource \filename{modelica://$\mathit{LibraryName}$/Resources/Language/$\mathit{LibraryName}$.$\mathit{language}$.po}.
This file is a copy of the associated template file, but extended with the translations in the specified language.
The pattern \filename{$\mathit{language}$} stands for the ISO 639-1 language code, e.g., \filename{de} or \filename{en}.
\end{enumerate}

> The files consist of a header and a body.
> The detailed format of these files is described in \href{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.pdf}{GNU gettext}.
> 
> \begin{nonnormative}
> In the remainder of this section, several facts about the gettext specification are described non-normatively for easy access to some of the gettext basics.
> Always refer to the external gettext specification for full detail or in case of doubt.
> 
> All text strings are in double quotes and encoded with UTF-8 characters.
> Comments start with an \lstinline!#! and are continued until the end of line.
> Spaces outside strings are ignored and used as separators.
> 
> The header is marked with an empty \lstinline!msgid! entry and looks like this:

Reviewer: @gkurzbach, please bear with me; I know I'm creating what seems like an endless stream of suggestions. I both hope and believe it will soon come to an end!

When taking a step back, I see a normative statement squeezed in between big non-normative sections.  This suggestions tries to avoid the normative statement getting lost:
```suggestion
The detailed format of these files is described in \href{https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.pdf}{GNU gettext}.
For Modelica translations, only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used.

\begin{nonnormative}
In the remainder of this section, several facts about the gettext specification are described non-normatively for easy access to some of the gettext basics.
Always refer to the external gettext specification for full detail or in case of doubt.

All text strings are in double quotes and encoded with UTF-8 characters.
Comments start with an \lstinline!#! and are continued until the end of line.
Spaces outside strings are ignored and used as separators.

The files consist of a header and a body.
The header is marked with an empty \lstinline!msgid! entry and looks like this:
```

Author: I'm glad you always suggest changes right away and I just have to commit them. Sometimes mistakes happen. But it's good that way, especially because I'm not familiar with the means of formatting in the specification.

\begin{lstlisting}
# SOME DESCRIPTIVE TITLE.
# Copyright (C) YEAR THE PACKAGE'S COPYRIGHT HOLDER
# This file is distributed under the same license as the PACKAGE package.
# FIRST AUTHOR <EMAIL@ADDRESS>, YEAR.
#
#, fuzzy
msgid ""
msgstr ""
"Project-Id-Version: PACKAGE VERSION\n"
"Report-Msgid-Bugs-To: \n"
"POT-Creation-Date: 2019-03-15 10:52+0100\n"
"PO-Revision-Date: YEAR-MO-DA HO:MI+ZONE\n"
"Last-Translator: FULL NAME <EMAIL@ADDRESS>\n"
"Language-Team: LANGUAGE <LL@li.org>\n"
"Language: \n"
"MIME-Version: 1.0\n"
"Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8\n"
"Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit\n"
\end{lstlisting}
All general terms in the header should be replaced by specific information.

In the body, directly following the header, for each descriptive text there is an entry of the form
\begin{lstlisting}
#: $\mathit{filename}$:$\mathit{lineNumber}$
msgctxt $\mathit{messageContext}$
msgid $\mathit{messageIdentifier}$
msgstr $\mathit{messageTranslation}$
\end{lstlisting}

> \end{nonnormative}
> 
> Only the keywords \lstinline!msgctxt!, \lstinline!msgid! and \lstinline!msgstr! are used.
> 
> \begin{nonnormative}

Reviewer: To go with suggested change above:
```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Now I see that there's is a connected problem here with references to the non-normatively introduced entry above.  Any chance we could resolve this more efficiently over zoom?
